add Flink HA document and example (#43)
streamshub/flink-sql-examples: ha-example/README.md

# Flink cluster HA configuration

In the deployment of Flink cluster, it consists of operators, job managers, and task managers.
By default, the deployment is not a high availability (HA) cluster, we need to configure it to achieve it.

## Flink operator

The Flink operator manages and operates Flink Deployments. It supports high availability through leader election and standby operator instances.
To enable leader election we need to add the following two mandatory operator configuration parameters.

```
kubernetes.operator.leader-election.enabled: true
kubernetes.operator.leader-election.lease-name: flink-operator-lease
```

> The lease name must be unique in the current lease namespace.

Reviewer: What is the "lease namespace". Is it the ns where the operator is deployed?

Author: Yes, it is. Let me update it. Thanks.

> So, when installing flink operator using helm, we need to add these 2 configs + existing default configs via command like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When installing the Flink Kubernetes operator using `helm`, we need to add these 2 parameters into the existing default configuration string.
This can be done via the command line using the `--set` flag:
```
I realise this is a consequence of how the config passing is set up in the operator, but this is not great UX. If these other options are truely _default_ then they should be in the `helm/flink-kubernetes-operator/conf/flink-conf.yaml`. That way only user supplied defaults could be set via the helm cli/custom values file.

Might be a good improvement to the helm chart upstream.

Author: +1! Will work on that!

```
helm install flink-kubernetes-operator flink-operator-repo/flink-kubernetes-operator \
--set podSecurityContext=null \
--set defaultConfiguration."log4j-operator\.properties"=monitorInterval\=30 \
--set defaultConfiguration."log4j-console\.properties"=monitorInterval\=30 \
--set replicas=2 \
--set defaultConfiguration."flink-conf\.yaml"="kubernetes.operator.metrics.reporter.slf4j.factory.class\:\ org.apache.flink.metrics.slf4j.Slf4jReporterFactory
kubernetes.operator.metrics.reporter.slf4j.interval\:\ 5\ MINUTE
kubernetes.operator.reconcile.interval:\ 15\ s
kubernetes.operator.observer.progress-check.interval:\ 5\ s
kubernetes.operator.leader-election.enabled:\ true
kubernetes.operator.leader-election.lease-name:\ flink-operator-lease" \
-n flink
```

> Note: The `replicas` config is to set the number of operator replicas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: The `replicas` configuration is to set to the total number of Flink Kubernetes operator replicas you want.
This will include the leader plus the number of standby instances you want. 
One standby (two replicas in total) is usually sufficient.
```

> After running this command, you should see there are 2 operator replicas lanuched.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After running this command, you should see that there are two instances of the Flink Kubernetes operator running.
```

```
kubectl  get pod -n flink | grep flink-kubernetes-operator
NAME                                          READY   STATUS    RESTARTS         AGE
flink-kubernetes-operator-6cd86cc8-fmb2x      2/2     Running   0                3h
flink-kubernetes-operator-6cd86cc8-g298v      2/2     Running   0                3h
```

And when checking the `lease` resource, we can see hte holder(leader) operator's name.
```
kubectl get lease -n flink
NAME                       HOLDER                                      AGE
flink-operator-lease       flink-kubernetes-operator-6cd86cc8-g298v    45h
```

> When trying to delete the leader operator pod, we can see the holder will change to the other one (or the newly created one),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can test the high availability fail-over between the instances, by deleting the leader operator pod.
You should then see that the holder will change to the other instance (or the newly created instance if the creation happens quickly).
```

which makes the operator highly available.

## job manager

> The JobManager ensures consistency during recovery across TaskManagers. For the JobManager itself to recover consistently,

Reviewer: If you make it one sentence per line then it is easier to comment. Also I suggest using soft not hard wrap in your editor, to prevent lines getting split.

an external service must store a minimal amount of recovery metadata (like “ID of last committed checkpoint”),
as well as help to elect and lock which JobManager is the leader (to avoid split-brain situations).

> Configure job manager high availability with kubernetes mode like this in flink configuration:

Author: Updated to this: 

In order to configure Job Managers in your Flink Cluster for high availability you need to add the following settings to the configuration in your `FlinkDeplyment` CR like this:
```yaml
apiVersion: flink.apache.org/v1beta1
kind: FlinkDeployment
metadata:
  name: recommendation-app
spec:
  image: quay.io/streamshub/flink-sql-runner:v0.0.1
  flinkVersion: v1_19
  flinkConfiguration:
    # job manager HA settings
    high-availability.type: KUBERNETES
    high-availability.storageDir: s3://test/ha
```

```
high-availability.type: kubernetes
high-availability.storageDir: s3:///flink/recovery
```

## task manager

Checkpointing is Flink’s primary fault-tolerance mechanism, wherein a snapshot of your job’s state persisted periodically to some durable location.
In the case of failure, Flink will restart from the most recent checkpoint and resume processing.
Although this is not completely related to HA of the flink cluster, it is also important to know it for the Flink fault tolerance.

> By default, the checkpointing is not enabled in Flink cluster, you can enable it by setting the checkpointing interval:

Author: Updated to this:

By default, the checkpointing is not enabled in Flink cluster, you can enable it by setting the checkpointing interval in the `FlinkDeplyment` CR like this:
```yaml
apiVersion: flink.apache.org/v1beta1
kind: FlinkDeployment
metadata:
  name: recommendation-app
spec:
  image: quay.io/streamshub/flink-sql-runner:v0.0.1
  flinkVersion: v1_19
  flinkConfiguration:
    # job manager HA settings
    execution.checkpointing.interval: 1min
    state.checkpoints.dir: s3://test/cp
```

```
execution.checkpointing.interval: 1min
state.checkpoints.dir: s3://test/cp
```
In this example, it will checkpoint the process status every 1 minute into the s3 path.

### Run HA in recommendation-app application

> Here, we will use [recommendation-app](../recommendation-app) as an example to demonstrate the job manager HA.

Author: I've added step 1 to this:

1. Installing Flink Kubernetes Operator with leader election enabled like this:
   ```
   helm install flink-kubernetes-operator flink-operator-repo/flink-kubernetes-operator \
   --set podSecurityContext=null \
   --set defaultConfiguration."log4j-operator\.properties"=monitorInterval\=30 \
   --set defaultConfiguration."log4j-console\.properties"=monitorInterval\=30 \
   --set replicas=2 \
   --set defaultConfiguration."flink-conf\.yaml"="kubernetes.operator.metrics.reporter.slf4j.factory.class\:\ org.apache.flink.metrics.slf4j.Slf4jReporterFactory
   kubernetes.operator.metrics.reporter.slf4j.interval\:\ 5\ MINUTE
   kubernetes.operator.reconcile.interval:\ 15\ s
   kubernetes.operator.observer.progress-check.interval:\ 5\ s
   kubernetes.operator.leader-election.enabled:\ true
   kubernetes.operator.leader-election.lease-name:\ flink-operator-lease" \
   -n flink
   ```

1. Follow the [guide](minio-install/README.md) to deploy and create a bucket named `test` in minio
2. Replace the `MINIO_POD_ID` in `recommendation-app-HA/flink-deployment-ha.yaml` with this command output:
   ```
   kubectl get pod minio -n flink --template={{.status.podIP}}
   ```
3. Deploy the flinkDeployment with HA configured
   ```
   kubectl apply -f recommendation-app-HA/flink-deployment-ha.yaml -n flink
   ```
4. There will be 2 recommendation-app (job manager) and 1 task manager pods deployed
   ```
   kubectl  get pod -l app=recommendation-app -n flink
   NAME                                  READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
   recommendation-app-76b6854f98-4qcz4   1/1     Running   0          3m59s
   recommendation-app-76b6854f98-9zb24   1/1     Running   0          3m59s
   recommendation-app-taskmanager-1-1    1/1     Running   0          2m5s
   ``` 

> 5. Browse the minio console, to make sure the metadata of the job manager is uploaded to s3://test/ha  

Author: Yes, I've documented in `minio-install/README.md`.

To enable leader election, we need to add the following two mandatory parameters to the Kubernetes operator's configuration.

```
kubernetes.operator.leader-election.enabled: true
kubernetes.operator.leader-election.lease-name: flink-operator-lease
```
The lease name must be unique in the deployed namespace.

When installing the Flink Kubernetes operator using `helm`, we need to add these 2 parameters into the existing default configuration string.
This can be done via the command line using the `--set` flag:
```
helm install flink-kubernetes-operator flink-operator-repo/flink-kubernetes-operator \
--set podSecurityContext=null \
--set defaultConfiguration."log4j-operator\.properties"=monitorInterval\=30 \
--set defaultConfiguration."log4j-console\.properties"=monitorInterval\=30 \
--set replicas=2 \
--set defaultConfiguration."flink-conf\.yaml"="kubernetes.operator.metrics.reporter.slf4j.factory.class\:\ org.apache.flink.metrics.slf4j.Slf4jReporterFactory
kubernetes.operator.metrics.reporter.slf4j.interval\:\ 5\ MINUTE
kubernetes.operator.reconcile.interval:\ 15\ s

> kubernetes.operator.observer.progress-check.interval:\ 5\ s

Reviewer 2: Are these configurations somehow related to HA configuration (except replicas)? It doesn't look like yes to me and it might be confusing for anyone.

kubernetes.operator.leader-election.enabled:\ true
kubernetes.operator.leader-election.lease-name:\ flink-operator-lease" \
-n flink
```
Note: The `replicas` configuration is to set to the total number of Flink Kubernetes operator replicas you want.
This will include the leader plus the number of standby instances you want.
One standby (two replicas in total) is usually sufficient.

After running this command, you should see that there are two instances of the Flink Kubernetes operator running.
```
kubectl  get pod -n flink | grep flink-kubernetes-operator
NAME                                          READY   STATUS    RESTARTS         AGE
flink-kubernetes-operator-6cd86cc8-fmb2x      2/2     Running   0                3h
flink-kubernetes-operator-6cd86cc8-g298v      2/2     Running   0                3h
```

> And when checking the `lease` resource, we can see hte holder(leader) operator's name.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
And when checking the `lease` resource, we can see the holder(leader) operator's name.
```

Author: Oh, nice catch. Thanks.

```
kubectl get lease -n flink
NAME                       HOLDER                                      AGE
flink-operator-lease       flink-kubernetes-operator-6cd86cc8-g298v    45h
```

You can test the high availability fail-over between the instances, by deleting the leader operator pod.
You should then see that the holder will change to the other instance (or the newly created instance if the creation happens quickly).

## Flink Job Manager

The Job Manager ensures consistency during recovery across Task Managers.
For the Job Manager itself to recover consistently,
an external service must store a minimal amount of recovery metadata (like “ID of last committed checkpoint”),
as well as information needed to elect and lock which Job Manager is the leader (to avoid split-brain situations).

> In order to configure Job Managers in your Flink Cluster for high availability you need to add the following settings to the configuration in your `FlinkDeplyment` CR like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to configure Job Managers in your Flink Cluster for high availability you need to add the following settings to the configuration in your `FlinkDeployment` CR like this:
```

Author: Oh, nice catch!

```yaml
apiVersion: flink.apache.org/v1beta1
kind: FlinkDeployment
metadata:
  name: recommendation-app
spec:
  image: quay.io/streamshub/flink-sql-runner:v0.0.1

>   flinkVersion: v1_19

Reviewer 2: We should unify flink version here and in docs bellow (1.19 vs 1.20)

Author: Good point! Updated.

  flinkConfiguration:
    # job manager HA settings
    high-availability.type: KUBERNETES
    high-availability.storageDir: s3://test/ha
```

## Task Manager

[Checkpointing](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.20/docs/dev/datastream/fault-tolerance/checkpointing/) is Flink’s primary fault-tolerance mechanism, wherein a snapshot of your job’s state is persisted periodically to some durable location.
In the case of failure, of a Task running your job's code, Flink will restart the Task from the most recent checkpoint and resume processing.

> Although not strictly related to HA of the Flink cluster, it is important to enable check-pointing in production deployments to ensure fault tolerance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although not strictly related to HA of the Flink cluster, it is important to enable checkpointing in production deployments to ensure fault tolerance.
```
Looks like we are using `checkpointing` in most places rather than `check-pointing`.

> Although not strictly related to HA of the Flink cluster, it is important to enable check-pointing in production deployments to ensure fault tolerance.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Although not strictly related to HA of the Flink cluster, it is important to enable checkpointing in production deployments to ensure fault tolerance.
```

> By default, the checkpointing is not enabled in Flink cluster, you can enable it by setting the checkpointing interval in the `FlinkDeplyment` CR like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the checkpointing is not enabled.
You can enable it by setting the checkpointing interval in the `FlinkDeployment` CR like this:
```

> By default, the checkpointing is not enabled in Flink cluster, you can enable it by setting the checkpointing interval in the `FlinkDeplyment` CR like this:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By default, the checkpointing is not enabled in Flink cluster, you can enable it by setting the checkpointing interval in the `FlinkDeployment` CR like this:
```

spec:
  image: quay.io/streamshub/flink-sql-runner:v0.0.1
  flinkVersion: v1_19
  flinkConfiguration:
    # job manager HA settings
    execution.checkpointing.interval: 1min
    state.checkpoints.dir: s3://test/cp
```
The settings above will checkpoint the Task state every 1 minute under the s3 path provided.

## Example: Making the `recommendation-app` fault tolerant and highly available

Here, we will use the [recommendation-app](../recommendation-app) as an example to demonstrate the job manager HA.

1. Installing Flink Kubernetes Operator with leader election enabled like this:
   ```
   helm install flink-kubernetes-operator flink-operator-repo/flink-kubernetes-operator \
   --set podSecurityContext=null \
   --set defaultConfiguration."log4j-operator\.properties"=monitorInterval\=30 \
   --set defaultConfiguration."log4j-console\.properties"=monitorInterval\=30 \
   --set replicas=2 \
   --set defaultConfiguration."flink-conf\.yaml"="kubernetes.operator.metrics.reporter.slf4j.factory.class\:\ org.apache.flink.metrics.slf4j.Slf4jReporterFactory
   kubernetes.operator.metrics.reporter.slf4j.interval\:\ 5\ MINUTE
   kubernetes.operator.reconcile.interval:\ 15\ s

>    kubernetes.operator.observer.progress-check.interval:\ 5\ s

Reviewer 2: Same as above

   kubernetes.operator.leader-election.enabled:\ true
   kubernetes.operator.leader-election.lease-name:\ flink-operator-lease" \
   -n flink
   ```
2. Follow the [guide](minio-install/README.md) to deploy and create a local S3 compatible storage service using minio and add a bucket named `test`.
3. Replace the `MINIO_POD_ID` in `recommendation-app-HA/flink-deployment-ha.yaml` with this command output:
   ```
   kubectl get pod minio -n flink --template={{.status.podIP}}
   ```
4. Deploy the `FlinkDeployment` CR with HA configured
   ```
   kubectl apply -f recommendation-app-HA/flink-deployment-ha.yaml -n flink
   ```
5. There should be 2 recommendation-app job manager and 1 task manager pod deployed
   ```
   kubectl  get pod -l app=recommendation-app -n flink
   NAME                                  READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
   recommendation-app-76b6854f98-4qcz4   1/1     Running   0          3m59s
   recommendation-app-76b6854f98-9zb24   1/1     Running   0          3m59s
   recommendation-app-taskmanager-1-1    1/1     Running   0          2m5s
   ``` 

> 6. Browse the minio console, to make sure the metadata of the job manager is uploaded to s3://test/ha 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Browse the minio console, to make sure the metadata of the job manager is uploaded to `s3://test/ha` 
```

7. Find out which job manager pod is the leader

>    Check the pod logs, if it's the standby job manager, the log will stay at these lines, and waiting for becoming the leader.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   To do this, check the pod logs. 
   If a job manager is the standby, then the log will indicate that it is watching and waiting to becoming the leader.
```

   ```
   kubectl  logs -n flink recommendation-app-76b6854f98-4qcz4 --tail=2 -f
   2024-12-11 08:31:22,729 INFO  org.apache.flink.kubernetes.kubeclient.resources.KubernetesConfigMapSharedInformer [] - Starting to watch for flink/recommendation-app-cluster-config-map, watching id:3c7e23f2-fcaa-4f47-8623-fa1ebe9609ea
   2024-12-11 08:31:22,729 INFO  org.apache.flink.kubernetes.kubeclient.resources.KubernetesConfigMapSharedInformer [] - Starting to watch for flink/recommendation-app-cluster-config-map, watching id:ea191b50-a1ce-43c6-9bfc-a61f739fa8b3
   ```
8. Delete the leader pod of job manager, and monitor the logs of the standby pod

>    Keep the step(5) command running, and delete the leader pod in another terminal

Reviewer 3: do you mean step(7) here?

Author: Nice catch!

   ```
   kubectl  logs -n flink recommendation-app-76b6854f98-4qcz4 --tail=2 -f
   ...
   2024-12-11 08:50:16,438 INFO  org.apache.flink.kubernetes.kubeclient.resources.KubernetesLeaderElector [] - New leader elected  for recommendation-app-cluster-config-map.
   2024-12-11 08:50:16,518 INFO  org.apache.flink.kubernetes.kubeclient.resources.KubernetesLeaderElector [] - New leader elected 907d6eda-7619-45c5-97c6-e2a6243f56f6 for recommendation-app-cluster-config-map.
   2024-12-11 08:50:16,524 INFO  org.apache.flink.runtime.jobmaster.MiniDispatcherRestEndpoint [] - http://10.244.1.30:8081 was granted leadership with leaderSessionID=87a6a102-c77b-4ec2-b263-b20a60921c9e
   2024-12-11 08:50:16,524 INFO  org.apache.flink.runtime.resourcemanager.ResourceManagerServiceImpl [] - Resource manager service is granted leadership with session id 87a6a102-c77b-4ec2-b263-b20a60921c9e.
   ```
   You should see the leadership is changed to the other pod.

> 9. Make sure the checkpointing file is successfully uploaded onto s3://test/cp via minio console 9Monitor the sink topic in kafka

Reviewer: ```suggestion
9. Make sure the checkpointing file is successfully uploaded to `s3://test/cp` via the minio console.
    Monitor the sink topic in kafka
```

> 9. Make sure the checkpointing file is successfully uploaded onto s3://test/cp via minio console 9Monitor the sink topic in kafka

Reviewer 3: 9Monitor?
